My name is Elizabeth and I'm here talking to Dr.
Matney about Amtrak passenger service. Dr.
Matney, can you tell me a little bit about your
personal knowledge or your personal background
with trains? Well, I became interested in
passenger trains through our historical society
here in Houston in the Gulf Coast chapter of the
National Railway Historical Society back in 1970
and became formally involved by joining that
society and this was right at the at the tail end of
the of the passenger service just prior to Amtrak
and of course one developed a keen interest in the
passenger service available because we have one
or two cars in the society that we can pick on behind
passenger trains and run. So if they
discontinued, we wouldn't have any way to ride our
cars. So we took a pretty keen interest in the
passenger service back in those days. And then I
gravitated from that to becoming more interested
in trying to do something to help restore
passenger service in the country, instead of
sticking with the historical stuff like what's
going on now and what can we do to help bring it
about. And I soon heard about and joined the
National Association of Railway Passengers. And
it was the lobbying organization that gathers
money from its membership and used it as a formal
lobbying process for Congress and to get the
enabling legislation drafted and passed and to
create ANTRAC. It has been a very strong, had a very
strong influence on the development of ANTRAC
since ANTRAC's original law. ANTRAC, as you know,
It's a government-developed organization which
also includes private representation on its
board of directors from the railroad industry
itself. So it's a mixture of government and
private
leadership. Can you tell me who owns Amtrak? Well,
it is a corporation. a supposed to be a profit
corporation. And if they can ever run the trains
and make a profit, I guess it'll turn into that. But
the government is responsible for keeping it
afloat. Not too unlikely to do some things like
Chrysler and Boeing and other industries. When a
company gets so large that it presents a national
process that it goes out of business, well then it
suddenly, as long as the company's making money,
it's just great and it's a private enterprise. But
if it's large enough and it begins to lose money,
well then it becomes the sad duty of the federal
government to keep bailing it out. I think that
there's a companion A companion rail adventure
that the government got into by necessity, which
is related to Amtrak, and that's Conrail. Conrail
started out by two huge railroads literally going
bankrupt, the Penn Central and the New York, the
Pennsylvania Railroad and the New York Central.
About what time was this? Oh, this is back in the
60s. And they...
They merged into a Penn Central, and that's always
a desperation. When two of them are in financial
trouble, they get together just to amplify it. It
doesn't really solve much. You've got to merge
something that's losing with something that's
winning in order to come out of how it was. At any
rate, they merged and formed Penn Central, and
that didn't work. And then the government... took
over and established a thing called Conrail,
which included, I think, six or seven railroads
that were Title XI situations, you know,
bankruptcy, and up in the Northeast. Now, they
poured money into it, but it's very essential that
they build up their tracks and their network and
their systems on the main lines. And it's hard to
believe, but Conrail is now making a profit. And I
look in the future to Amtrak doing that and to get
quickly to some of the issues that are really
important in Amtrak's history. It has
traditionally focused on two kinds of service.
the Northeast, and everybody else. And everybody
else is long-distance traffic. And it turns out
that long-distance trains are the profit makers,
not the losers. And in the beginning, it was
thought to be just the opposite. And where you
needed rail is where you had lots of people riding,
even short distances. That was the initial
thought. And the Northeast Corridor, where there
are 26 trains each way each day from Washington to
New York to Boston, was selected as the ideal
corridor to develop. And they did develop it. But
it has never been a profit-making thing. And in the
beginning, Amtrak was literally set up to conduct
a funeral service over the pastor's system and to
sort of get it out of everybody's corporate hair
and let it die a natural death and provide a good
funereal service and bury the damn thing and get it
out. But it seemed to revive, unfortunately, and
it flourished a bit. And then the Northeast
Corridor came in and they introduced the
Metroliners and now they have some some i i think
very fast trains are up in the 120 mile an hour
category and stretches of that very fast but
they're losing money because the distance that
people travel the tickets they can't charge
enough and be competitive with with buses and with
the real uh cheap fare airline service. They have
walk-on airline service between those major
cities in the Northeast. You can just walk on an
airliner and pay your $15 or whatever it is and go
from Washington to New York. No reservations, no
nothing. There's another airliner that will open
its doors and you can board it 20 minutes later or
whatever. So it's just a shuttle. That's the kind
of fairs that you're in competition
with. And it's kind of unfair because a lot of the
airport, a lot of the airline's operations are
government funded. All the people in the control
towers, I guess you remember the controllers and
their strike and all that kind of stuff. At any
rate, I think we've got two completely different
systems and two completely different sets of
numbers to look at, and that's the long-distance
trains, which are everything outside the
northeast corner and the northeast corner. There
are some short-distance trains in California
that have been initiated and are running well. but
their distances are slightly longer than the ones
out there. To give you a good example, we're now
thinking of changing the route structure of the
Sunset Limit. This is a train that runs at all our
good cheer behind many times from New Orleans to
Houston to San Antonio to El Paso on out to Los
Angeles. And the plan is to change that route both
in time and where it goes. So it'll be an overnight
train in each direction from New Orleans to
Houston. And in Houston, it will go to Dallas via
College Station. So you won't have to drive your
Oldsmobile home anymore. You can get on that
train. That would be more convenient. Wouldn't
that be fun? Yeah. It'll go to Dallas, and then Fort
Worth, and then Abilene, Midland, Odessa, and El
Paso. San Antonio will continue to be served by the
Eagle, which now goes to Austin and Fort Worth and
Dallas and Texarkana and so on. Now, those trains
will meet up there. And in addition to those two
trains, which will have a meet in the Fort
Worth-Dallas area every day in each direction, so
you can ride up and go in either direction on the
other trains, If you wanted to, there's going to be
the reinitiation of the Lone Star from Fort Worth
North to Oklahoma City, maybe Tulsa, and to Kansas
City and Chicago. There's some question as to
whether it'll go the old route and go up to Wichita
and then Kansas City, or go over and connect to
Tulsa. Now, the thing that's interesting about
that is that people say, but you're disrupting the
traffic between Houston and San Antonio. What
kind of traffic do you have? That train gets to San
Antonio now at 4 in the morning in one direction and
6 in the other. So what kind of traffic are we
interfering with at that time of morning? We're
not. Plus the fact that you don't want to make it
attractive for people to ride the train on short
distances because if you've got a reserved train,
it blocks people from getting through tickets to
go a long distance if all the seats are occupied for
100 miles or so or 200 miles or so by a bunch of people
going from Houston to Dallas. You've got to have
additional cars that you put on or you've got to
have another section of the train to take to absorb
that short traffic situation. When are they
thinking about? Well, the next schedule change is
April 29.
But there's some grim news in this whole
situation, too. They sent a test train down to run
from Houston to Amtrak. from Houston to Dallas via
College Station. And all that great thing was
happening right in your backyard while you're
going to school and you didn't understand what was
happening. It took eight and a half hours for that
train to get from Houston to Dallas. Why did it take
eight and a half hours? Track conditions
primarily. Now, I don't think city government
should be left out of this thing either. They have a
tendency to slap slow orders, ostensibly for
safety, so that trains can't take possession of
the grade crossing at speeds in excess of 25 miles
an hour or something. They just can't do that
anymore if we're going to have passengers. We
can't afford to put an overpass or an underpass and
replace all these crossings at grade level.
There's just not enough money in the world. We've
got something like 700 of them in Houston, which is
more than several states have. And you can't do
that. It's just not practical. So people, I think,
are going to have to get used to trains running a lot
faster. I would rather have them running faster.
It's a lot more convenient. You see a freight.
coming towards you, and you're in a car, and you're
coming to a crossing, if that freight is barreling
along at 45 miles an hour, I think you have a
tendency to sit there and wait, because it's not
going to take long for the freight to pass at that
speed. But if it's creeping along at 15 to 20 to 25,
your tendency is to think, hey, that's a long
train. I'm going to be here five minutes waiting
for that thing to go by at that speed. And you have a
tendency to try to run the gate or get across in
front of it if there is no speed. And I think it would
be much safer. And Dallas apparently has just done
that. They've stricken their ordinances that
deal with the train speeds and the railroads and
the federal government, which has to approve the
track conditions. Certain speeds can be run with
certain track conditions. The better the track,
the higher the speeds, up to a point. if you have
crossings there is a point which you can't go so it
would make it much more reasonable to take strike
out all those ordinances there are some little
towns i don't know whether college bryan college
station have local ordinances that that unduly
restrict the speeds of trains going through there
or not sure they don't have it you almost go right
through that campus Just about. And some people
get real alarmed if you're going to have a train
that's going to go through there at 50 miles an
hour. Of course, I think there would be enough
passenger service there that the passenger
trains, which are the ones that really want to
speed up, are going to be stopping at the start.
Yeah, I think you're right. I know that the campus
spreads out across both sides of the track, though
that might cause a problem. Well, we're trying,
you know, in Texas to eventually come up with a
triangle of good passenger service. And that
would run from Houston to Dallas, Fort Worth, to
San Antonio, to Houston, and be a triangle,
actually. And to have good, high-speed trains
that would service intermediate points. You
know, we've got some large population centers in
between the traffic to College Station, When
certain ball games are going on, we ought to have
special trains. Why should everybody get in their
own car and drive up there? Just imagine how many
people we could get to ride a train if you had
special trains in Texas. The Longhorns are
playing the Aggies at College Station. We've got,
I don't know what the estimate is, 70,000 Texas X's
that live in Houston. What about the train they
were thinking about, the bullet train between
Houston and Dallas? That's the one that is being
planned by a private company and it's going to take
quite a bit of financing because high-speed
trains have to have isolated tracks. And they've
got to get it up, and you can't have any deer ambling
across or anything else. It's got to be completely
isolated. And when you get into towns, it's
usually elevated. And that train, the train
they're thinking about is... which is the very
high speed train that's made in France and is in
operation in France now. And it's capable of
speeds of around 200 miles an hour, so it's a very
fast train. It would reduce train time to less than
two hours from downtown Houston to downtown
Dallas, for example. And that would mean
time-wise that no one would fly anymore. Why would
you fly if you're going from downtown Dallas? The
problem with that reasoning is that you have to get
to downtown to get onto the train. what kind of a how
would you get down there and what would you do with
what you've got down there with you know are you
going to go down and have a big parking lot like we
had out there i think the i think the training
system of course one would one would argue well you
get down there the same way that you get to the
airport but i don't know if we had downtown parking
that would satisfy like we have out of the airport.
No, I think Houston won't require any station.
Well, you're talking about the development of
MTA, of the mass transit and buses and whatever
they're going to put in to mobilize people so they
don't have to jump in their car and go park it and go
do something. So... Public transportation both
at this end and Houston and that end and Dallas have
to be improved to the point where you can do it and
not worry about getting from your home to down
there. What about recently when the mass
transit... The rail plan. Yeah, the rail plan just
got voted down. What about that? As a rail
advocate, I guess I'm expected to say that I was
bitterly disappointed, but I really wasn't
because, first of all, I think that there are less
expensive ways to build rail now that would be
acceptable and rather attractive.
They're going at it with heavy rail, and that is...
That is very expensive, and I think light rail
would have been better. The major difference
between heavy rail and light rail is that heavy
rail is electrical. They operate in trains that
drive their power from the bottom. They're
usually a third rail that feeds the electricity to
the train. The light rail is an overhead
electrical system.
And it's much easier to put up. And the reason for
that is if you can run light rail out on the ground,
you can have grain crossings and all that, and your
electricity is up in the air. If you've got it on the
ground, you can't have a grain crossing. It would
be electrocuted. So it's a much more expensive way
to do it. The second reason that I wasn't too
disappointed is that the rail line that they were
planning didn't go anywhere. It went to some major
shopping areas like Greenwood Plaza in downtown.
And people were expected to feed in, presumably on
buses which would connect to the train. You can't
even get people to make a transfer We've got a very
good bus service if you get down to it. We've got a 31
bus that comes out here in our area, goes right down
Gessner, half a block from where we're sitting,
goes up to the Katy Freeway, gets on the Katy
Freeway, has the express all the way downtown.
It'll outrun me if I'm in my car. Get downtown, now I
transfer. And I transfer to the number seven bus
that goes out to the medical center. But I'm like
most other people. That transfer is time
consuming. And you get on a bus up here where you've
got a seat all the way to town. Then you get on
something down there, and you're standing all the
way to the medical center in rush hour times. And
it's ridiculous. So people aren't going to do
that. What they needed to do was to set up this thing
so that it connected major areas in town with the
airports. so that there would be absolutely no
reason as to why you would really have to drive your
car to the airport. You could get on this thing at
many different points in town. You could get on one
branch of it that went out to the Astrodome Medical
Center and another branch in Greenway Plaza and
all those places over there. And they would
connect downtown. go out to Hobby in one direction
and go to Intercontinental in one direction and
Hobby in the other. And be high speed so that you
would just have a few stations to get on that thing.
Not a stop every two blocks like they were
designing. Because that destroys the purpose of
it also. So their traffic plan was ridiculous.
They should have maybe A station out in the
Astrodome area, another one in the medical
center, and nothing until you get downtown.
They should have a Greenway Plaza, and what's the
other one? I'm always forgetting. A big shopping
center that's out beyond it. Anyway, those two,
and then downtown. forget all this intermediate
stuff. You get from intermediate distances by bus
or some other way. Do you think that MARC can have
any impact on that, on the local scene? I think we
have to because
it's precisely the development of those kind of
systems which would intermash with getting our
high-speed train service to Dallas. We have to
have a way of collecting people and getting them to
the station and doing it fast. Speed is a critical
thing, not really cost as much as it is how much time
it takes. And if you can reduce the time, if you had a
public transportation system that could get you
to work faster than you can drive it, which way
would you go? Or go the fastest way. That's right.
And if you were... literally guaranteed a seat
with a reading light so that you could do something
in transit besides stand up and hold on to
something and be jostling around. There'd be no
question, right? So that's what we've got to move
forward, I think, towards. People are interested
in service and convenience, and I think more than
the actual cost, cost is important. People are
willing to pay a good price for a premium service.
What about the service up in the northeastern part
of the country? They have the shuttle between
Washington, D.C. and New York. Do businessmen...
In the airlines you're talking about, or I don't
know if my name is correct. In the rail service.
Rail service. This is the northeast part of it.
Right. And it's... There are... The last time I
counted the schedule, they're from... trains
from Washington, D.C. to New York, there were 26
trains. Well, let me put it this way. In Baltimore,
there are 26 trains each way, Amtrak trains, that
go through Baltimore in each direction each day.
Now, they don't all go all the way to New York. I
think there's one or two that stop in
Philadelphia. Are these mainly used by the
businessmen commuting? That's right. That's
right. Okay. Is most of the business then with the
businessmen, the daily traffic with them, or is it
with the long excursion trips that used to be so
popular, the cross-country vacations? Well,
we're back to our two different Amtrak systems.
The northeast corridor is mainly... people that
need to go short distances. The number of those
that have been on a long-distance train like the
Crescent that have come all the way from New
Orleans to Washington, D.C., and are now
continuing to New York as their last leg of their
long-distance trip would be a very small
percentage of the total passengers that ride from
Washington to New York. The long-distance
trains, virtually all the people that are on that
are going a long distance.
The people that used to board are Lone Star that
left here and went to Dallas and then on up
to Chicago. That train, most of the money, the
revenue that came in, to that train, an
overwhelming amount, maybe 80% of the total
dollars that were spent on tickets in Houston were
for Chicago and Leon. So people are riding the
longer distance on those trains, that's right.
Then is there more to future in the long distance
traveling? Yes, I think there isn't any question
about it. I think we could fill just about
anything, if we got this new roof structure that I
told you about here in Texas, and if it were to
become daily, they haven't yet got that idea.
They're still tri-weekly. But if that were a daily
service, boy, oh, boy, I just think it would really
be nice. And it's not so attractive for you to ride
from College Station to Houston. And the reason
for that is that you're going to run into slow
orders when you get way outside of Houston. In the
last 35 miles, you're going to be going 20. And it's
going to take hours, and then you're going to have
to go all the way downtown, and then you're going to
have to come all the way back out here. So, you know,
it's not that attractive for the short distance.
It will never be that attractive for the short
distances until you get the high-speed rail where
you get them isolated. But long distance, that'll
be a beautiful way to go to Chicago. It's so nice to
get on a train and have some things to do, like write
a report up like you're taping now and not have
anybody disturb you. You can be in the air a little
longer. sleeping room and stay there all day. So
you can come out and talk to people. You can go to the
dining party. It's a class act. I want to ask about
some of the services that Amtrak has changed over
the years. I know they took the dining car off for a
while, and I think they've put it back on. The
dining service has, first of all, when Amtrak The
Southern Pacific has always tried to go out of the
passenger business, and there wasn't any doubt
about it. So at
one time, they wanted to go out of business so they
could follow around. How can we discourage people
from riding? Well, we have a daily train and we're
obligated to run a daily train in those days. So
what they did was to take the dining car off and put
in a coin-operated eating cart where you had the
machines that dispersed to different things just
like you'd have in your dorm. You've probably got
some room that's got Coke machines and sandwich
machines and cookie machines and candy machines
and cigarette machines and all that junk. So you
can go in with your pocket full of quarters and get
whatever you're going to get out of these things.
It's ridiculous. And then they said, aha. Now, if
you'll let us go try weekly, we'll put first class
service back on. Because this is a
transcontinental train. So the ICC said, gosh,
that's a great idea you have. So now we lose our
daily service, but we get our dining car back and
our sleeping cars. There weren't anything but
chair cars on that thing. Does that help? All the
way from New Orleans to Los Angeles on the chair car
with Clint operating. Boy, the Southern Pacific
has really got vision. I'll tell you. So now they
put the dining car back on and they ran their train
tri-weekly. Then the Southern thinking, ah.
They're tri-weekly. We will go tri-weekly. So the
Crescent went tri-weekly and met, you know, had
meets in New Orleans on a tri-weekly basis. And it
was, it's, the tri-weekly service is really the
death knell of everything. You just, no one is
adjusted to, when does the train run? Right. I've
got to go to a meeting, and I've got to be in
Washington on Monday morning. When does the train
arrive? When can I leave Houston to get there? And
if you don't have daily service, you're probably
going to wind up there a day ahead of time, and no
one's going to do it. Or else you'll take the plane.
Or you're going to take an alternate. That's it.